---
title: "osquery 3.2.4 released!"
author: "Nick Anderson"
date: "2018-05-03"
---

We recently toggled the [osquery 3.2.4](https://github.com/osquery/osquery/releases/tag/3.2.4) release to be stable, making it our formal transition into osquery 3, huge success! This is a massive landmark for the osquery team, as it brings about numerous changes which dramatically increase both stability and performance. You can view a more complete list of the changes on the [osquery release notes](https://github.com/osquery/osquery/releases/tag/3.2.4), however we felt a blog post was required due to the size of some of the new features we've released.

osquery now makes use of [RapidJSON](https://github.com/Tencent/rapidjson) documents for data representations in our RocksDB backing store. This gives us a massive serialization speed bump over the Boost property trees and ultimately has been demonstrating less CPU consumption by the daemon. We've gone to some lengths to ensure that any residual data stored in RocksDB is migrated to the newer RapidJSON document types, however please reach out if you encounter any issues related to the database in Slack.

In 3.1.0 the Linux audit subsystem received a [generous overhaul](https://github.com/osquery/osquery/pull/3492) from the folks at Trail of Bits. Specifically the redesign brings in audit-based File Integrity Monitoring over the previous Linux inotify framework, addresses an issue with syscall filtering to ensure subscribers are only receiving events they desire, as well as sizable improvements to the systems responsiveness and naming schema.

Alongside these two massive changes are numerous bug fixes, new virtual tables, and performance enhancements. As always please reach out to us in Slack if you have any questions, comments, or other feedback! Happy hacking!
